AL WAKEELO — PAKISTANI PRECEDENT RESEARCH ENGINE

THE STATE VS MUKHTIAR KHAN
Citation: 2026 LHC 2236
Court: Lahore High Court (Honorable Mr. Justice Sadaqat Ali Khan)
THE STATE VS MUKHTIAR KHAN

FULL JUDGMENT & ORDER OF THE COURT
COURT: Lahore High Court (Honorable Mr. Justice Sadaqat Ali Khan)
DECISION DATE: 06-04-2026
CASE DETAILS: Murder Reference-Murder Reference (Session Cases) 9-26
============================================================
JUDGMENT SHEET
IN THE LAHORE HIGH COURT,
RAWALPINDI BENCH, RAWALPINDI
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT
Murder Reference No.09 of 2026
The State Versus Mukhtiar Khan
Criminal Appeal No.94 of 2026
Mukhtiar Khan Versus The State etc.
Date of hearing: 06.04.2026
Appellant by:- Malik Mukhtar Ahmad Talokar
and Malik Jhanzaib, Advocates.
Complainant by:- Malik Athar Yar Khan Awan,
Advocate.
State by:- Mr. Naveed Ahmad Warraich,
DPG.
SADAQAT ALI KHAN, J. Mukhtiar Khan
(appellant) alongwith Hamad Kh an and Ubaidullah Khan ( coaccused since acquitted ) has been tried by the trial Court in case
FIR No. 147 dated 21.04.2023 offences under Section s
302/324/148/149 PPC, Police Station Kamar Mushani,
District Mianwali and was convicted and sentenced vide
judgment dated 22.12.2025 as under:Mukhtiar Khan (appellant)
U/S 302(b) PPC
Sentenced to DEATH on two counts for committing murder
of Muhammad Ishtiaq and Ghulam Mustafa (deceased)
with compensation of Rs. 500,000/- (recoverable as arrears of land
revenue) each payable to legal heirs of each deceased u/s
544-A Cr.P.C , and in default whereof to further undergo
simple imprisonment for six months each.
2. Appellant ha s filed this criminal appeal against
his conviction and the trial Court has sent Murder Reference
for confirmation of his death sentence or otherwise which
are being decided through this single judgment.
3. Heard. Record perused.
4. Muhammad Ishtiaq and Ghulam Mustafa were
done to death on the road on 21.04.2023 at 02.15 p.m,
whereafter FIR was lodged on the same day at 04.15 p.m, on
the statement of Malik Muhammad Aftab/complainant PW14
(brother of Muhammad Ishtiaq deceased ) who while claiming himself

27 August 2026

2
Murder Reference No.09 of 2026
Criminal Appeal No.94 of 2026
to be the eyewitness of the occurrence stated in his
statement before the trial Court as under:“Stated that I am resident of Manda Khel and student. On
21.04.2023 at about 02:15 p.m., I along with my brother
Muhammad Ishtiaq, Amanullah s/o Amir Muhammad, my
brother Muhammad Mushtaq s/o Muhammad Iqbal, caste
Kallu, and Ghulam Mustafa s/o Faiz Muha mmad, caste
Sangwal, resident of Manda Khel, after offering Juma prayer
at Jamia Masjid Usama Lari Adda Manda Khel, were returning
towards our house. When we reached in front of our market at
Adda Manda Khel, the accused persons namely Mukhtiar s/o
Noor As mat, Hammad s/o Moazzam, Saeed Khan (since
deceased) s/o Abdullah Khan, Ubaidullah s/o Saeed Khan,
Manzoor s/o Rustam Khan, caste Pathan, armed with firearm
weapons, suddenly emerged there.
At once, accused Muhammad Saeed raised a lalkara that
they would avenge the previous enmity and teach us a lesson
today. Immediately thereafter, accused Mukhtiar, with his
firearm, fired four straight shots with the intention to kill upon
my brother Muhammad Ishtiaq, which hit him on the front of
his abdomen. After that , all the accused fired straight shots
with their respective firearms upon my brother Ishtiaq and
Ghulam Mustafa, which hit upon my brother Muhmmad
Ishtiaq, Ghulam Mushtafa and passersby Aamir s/o Ghulam
Mustafa, Inamullah s/o Noor Muhammad, and Ghulam Ras ool
s/o Gul Muhammad on different parts of their bodies. My
brother Muhammad Ishtiaq and Ghulam Mustafa, due to
severe injuries, fell down on the spot. I along with Amanullah
and Muhammad Mushtaq witnessed the entire occurrence with
our own eyes. We immedi ately shifted the injured persons and
my brother to RHC Kamar Mushani through a private vehicle.
My brother Muhammad Ishtiaq succumbed to his injuries at
RHC due to the firearm wounds.
The motive behind the occurrence is the previous enmity
between us and the accused persons regarding FIR
No.69/2011, 80/2011 and 126/2011 P.S. Kamar Mushani, on
account of which they, after mutual consultation and active
connivance, committed the occurrence. Thereafter, Rana Zahid
Iqbal S.I. reached at RHC Kamar -Mushani wher e he recorded
my statement/Fard Bayan Exh -PQ which was read over to me
and I put my signature as token of correctness of my
statement. Injured Ghulam Mustafa was also succumbed to the
above stated injuries afterwards. The injured passersby
persons refused to give statement in this case due to fear of
enmity. All a accused persons be punished accordingly. ”
5. Muhammad Mushtaq PW15 (brother of Malik Muhammad
Aftab, complainant and Muhammad Ishtiaq, deceased ) being eyewitness
while appearing before the trial Court has reiterated the
same story.
6. It is a matter of record that Amir, Inam Ullah and
Ghulam Rasool also sustained firearm injuries during the
same occurrence wh ose names have been mentioned in the
FIR but they being independent and material injured
eyewitnesses have not been produced by the prosecution

before the trial Court in support of its story , rather their
evidence ha s been withheld by the prosecution with the
3
Murder Reference No.09 of 2026
Criminal Appeal No.94 of 2026
reasons best known to it. So, presumption under illustration
(g) of Article 129 of Qanun-e-Shahadat Order 1984 can fairly
be drawn that had they been produced, they would have
been deposed against the prosecution.
7. It is a lso matter of record that Sa eed Khan ,
Manzoor Khan (accused since acquitted/mentioned in the FIR) and one
Sabir also sustained firearm injuries during the same
occurrence who have been got medically examined on the
request of police but their injuries have been supress ed in
the FIR creating doubt in the prosecution story.
8. Co-accused with effective role of firin g on the
person of Ghulam Mustafa ( deceased) has been acquitted by
the learned trial Court vide impugned judgment by
disbelieving the evidence of prosecution.
9. Another intriguing aspect of the matter is that
motive of the occurrence is previous enmity between the
parties. With this motive b oth the eyewitnesses ( Malik
Muhammad Aftab/complainantPW3 and Muhammad Mushtaq15) who are real
brothers of Muhammad Ishtiaq ( deceased) despite their
claimed presence at the spot did not receive even a single
scratch o n their bodies during the occurrence, had they
been present at the time of occurrence at the place of
occurrence, they would have also been prime target of the
accused, blessing them with unbelievable courtesy and
mercy shown to them by the accused knowing well that they
would depose against them by leaving them unhurt, is
absolutely unbelievable story.
10. The argument of learned counsel for the
complainant that appellant has admitted his presence at the
time of occurrence at the place of occurrence in h is defence
plea which is sufficient p roof of his guilt has no substance.
Appellant has not admitted the occurrence narrated by the
prosecution. The law is also settled by now that if the
4
Murder Reference No.09 of 2026
Criminal Appeal No.94 of 2026
prosecution fails to prove its case against an accused person
then th e accused person is to be acquitted even if he had
taken a plea and had thereby admitted killing the deceased.
The law is equally settled that statement of an accused person
recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C. is to be accepted or rejected
in toto. In present case, prosecution has failed to prove its case
against the appellant beyond shadow of doubt.
11. Motive of the occurrence was previous enmity
between the parties which is double edged weapon in
criminal cases as it can cut both the ways.
12. Recovery of pistol on pointing out of the appellant
in presence of negative report of PFSA is not only
inconsequential rather draws adverse inference.
13. We are mindful that murder of two persons is a
crime of heinous nature, Saeed Khan, Manzoor Khan (accused
since acquitted/mentioned in the FIR ) and one Sabir also sustained

firearm injuries during the same occurrence which were
suppressed by the complainant in the FIR discussed above .
Injured eyewitnesses have not appeared in support of
prosecution. Cases are to be decided on the basis of
evidence and evidence alone and not on the basis of
sentiments and emotions. Gruesome, heinous and brutal
nature of the offence may be relevant at the stage of
awarding suitable punishment for conviction but it is totally
irrelevant at the stage of appraising or reappraising the
evidence available on record to determine guilt of the
accused persons as possibility of an innocent person having
been wrongly involved in cases of such nature cannot be
ruled out. An accused person is presumed to be innocent till
the time he is proven guilty beyond reasonable doubt, and
this presumption of his innocence continues until the
prosecution succeeds in proving the charge against an
accused beyond reasonable doubt on the basis of legally
5
Murder Reference No.09 of 2026
Criminal Appeal No.94 of 2026
admissible, confidence inspiring, trustworthy and reliable
evidence which is missing in the present case.
14. In view of the above discussion, we entertain
serious doubt in our minds regarding participation of the
appellant. It is settled principle of law that for giving benefit
of doubt, it is not necessary that there should be many
circumstances creating doubt. If there is a circumstance
which creates reasonable doubt in the prudent mind about
the guilt of the accused, then he would be entitled to its
benefit not as a matter of grace or concession, but as of
right.
15. For the foregoing reasons, this criminal appeal of
the appellant is allowed, his conviction and sentence s
awarded by the trial Court vide impugned judgment are
hereby set-aside. Appellant (Mukhtiar Khan) is acquitted of the
charges and directed to be released forthwith, if not required
in any other case. Murder Reference is answered in
NEGATIVE and death sentence of appellant (Mukhtiar Khan) is
NOT CONFIRMED.
(TARIQ MAHMOOD BAJWA)
JUDGE
(SADAQAT ALI KHAN)
JUDGE
Approved for Reporting
Judge Judge
Sabir*

Generated from Al Wakeelo Legal Research Workstation — www.alwakeelo.com

